Problem (fix #294): no spec for subscriptions module (#323)
crypto-com/chain-main: x/subscription/spec/03_messages.md

<!--
order: 3
-->

# Messages

> ## MsgCreatePlan

Author: Sounds good

Merchant create plans, the message signer is the plan owner.

```protobuf
message MsgCreatePlan {
  string title;
  string description;
  Coin price,  // amount + denomination
  int32 expiration_time,
  bool tolerate_failure,
  int32 interval
  int32 interval_offset
}
```

## MsgStopPlan

Sent by plan owners, also removes all corresponding subscriptions.

```protobuf
message MsgStopPlan {
  int32 plan_id,
}
```

## MsgCreateSubscription

The message signer subscribe to the plan, fails if it'll expire before next collection time.

```protobuf
message MsgCreateSubscription {
  int32 plan_id,
  int32 expiration_time,
}
```

It'll consume some gas for estimated computational cost in future:

```
period0 = (block_time + interval_offset) / interval
periodn = (expiration_time + interval_offset) / interval
ConsumeGas( (periodn - period0 + 1) * GasPerCollection )
```

## MsgStopSubscription

A subscriber or a plan owner can stop a subscription.

```protobuf

> message MsgStopSubscription {

Reviewer: If a user has a monthly subscription and they stop a subscription. Does the subscription gets immediately stopped or at the end of month (when they have already paid for the whole month)?

Author: It's immediately removed from the state, but if you query the events of success payment collection of current period index, it's still in that list, I think merchant can use that list as the valid subscription list.

Author: We don't have a builtin way to query events directly though, unless using chain-indexing.

<!--
order: 3
-->

# Messages

## MsgCreatePlan

> Merchant create plans, the message signer is the plan owner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plan owners create plans, the message signer is the plan owner.
```

```protobuf
message MsgCreatePlan {
  string title;
  string description;
  Coin price,  // amount + denomination
  int32 expiration_time,
  bool tolerate_failure,
  int32 interval
  int32 interval_offset
}
```

## MsgStopPlan

> Sent by plan owner, also removes all subscriptions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sent by plan owners, also removes all corresponding subscriptions.
```

```protobuf
message MsgStopPlan {
  int32 plan_id,
}
```

## MsgCreateSubscription

The message signer subscribe to the plan, fails if it'll expire before next collection time.

```protobuf
message MsgCreateSubscription {
  int32 plan_id,

>   int32 expiration_time,

Reviewer 2: ok for subscribers to choose expiration time @christopher-crypto ?

Author: changed to use duration configured in plan.

}
```

It'll consume some gas for estimated computational cost in future:

```
period0 = (block_time + interval_offset) / interval
periodn = (expiration_time + interval_offset) / interval
ConsumeGas( (periodn - period0 + 1) * GasPerSubscription )
```

## MsgStopSubscription

> The subscriber or plan owner stop a subscription.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A subscriber or a plan owner can stop a subscription.
```

```protobuf
message MsgStopSubscription {
  int32 plan_id,
  Address subscriber,
}
```

## MsgReCollectPayments

> Plan owner can manually retry payment collection in case of failure. only those failed to pay in current period will be collected again, success ones are skipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plan owner can manually retry payment collection in the case of failures. Only unpaid subscriptions in the current period will be collected again, paid ones are skipped.
```

<!--
order: 3
-->

# Messages

## MsgCreatePlan

Merchant or payment provider create plans.

```protobuf
message MsgCreatePlan {
  string title;
  string description;
  Decimal price,  // price in fiat currency show to user
  string fiat_currency,  // fiat currency name
  string token_denom,  // denomination of token

>   Decimal conversion_rate,  // conversion rate from fiat currency to token, maintained by owner

Reviewer 2: @christopher-crypto maybe good to have a possibility to specify 1-to-1 plans which will be automatically deducted at begin block (without the plan owner submitting collect payment msg)

Reviewer 2: or simplify to only 1-to-1 rates (only specify denom, but no conversions)

Reviewer 2: for "begin block" collection, advantage is no extra fees

Author: now it supports:
- automatically collect in begin block once for each period
- merchant retry collection manually at any time

>   int32 interval

Reviewer 2: @thomasmktong-cryptocom maybe charging at "first day of the month" / "last day of the week" ...

Reviewer 2: "first Monday of the month"

Author: I think there's some complexity to add calendar to support non-fixed intervals, I guess we can support fixed-seconds intervals first, support calendar intervals at next step.

Author: Specified both intervals(fixed seconds and calendar one), but at implementation side, we can support second interval first for simplicity.

}
```

The message signer is the owner.

## MsgStopPlan

```protobuf
message MsgStopPlan {
  int32 planId = 1,
}
```

Can only stopped by the owner of the plan, also removes all subscriptions.

## MsgChangeConversionRate

```protobuf
message MsgChangeConversionRate {
  int32 planId = 1,
  Decimal rate = 2,
}
```

Can only be changed by plan owner.

## MsgCreateSubscription

```protobuf
message MsgCreateSubscription {
  int32 planId = 1,
}
```

The message signer subscribe the plan.

## MsgStopSubscription

```protobuf
message MsgStopSubscription {
  int32 planId = 1,
  Address subscriber = 2,
}
```

The subscriber unsubscribe the plan, or plan owner cancel a subscription.

## MsgCollectPayments

> 

Reviewer 2: @christopher-crypto in the real world, there's a "tolerance" -- where e.g. after 3 fails, it'll auto-cancel the subscription

Reviewer 2: but both options exist -- e.g. merchant may not want to auto-cancel

Author: Merchant can set `tolerate_failure` to `false`, then it'll automatically cancel failed subscription.
Or set `tolerate_failure` to `true`, then manually handle the retrying.

```protobuf
message MsgCollectPayments {
  int32 planId = 1,
}
```

Can only issued by plan owner.

> `x/subscription` module automatically collect payments from subscribers at begin block, and write collection results into events. Merchants or payment providers can watch the events, if there's failed payment, they can choose to stop the off-chain service or cancel the subscription.

Reviewer 2: for the automatic collection (without a manual tx by the plan owner), one thing to consider is how this could be misused -- as e.g. one could create plan-subscription cycles every second.
so one would either need to deduct fee for each operation or rate-limit the operations -- e.g. force that the plan has expiration time + there's a network param for "max collections"... so when creating the plan, one validation will be "(expiration time - time now) / period <= max collections".

one other random thought I had is that this could potentially be generalised not only for "msgsend", but for other tx that one may want to do periodically (withdraw reward, delegate...) -- but that's perhaps more advanced than the original goal / purpose of this module

Author: sounds like a standalone `cron` module ;D

Reviewer 2: Weave (alternative to Cosmos SDK) has this module: https://github.com/iov-one/weave/tree/master/x/cron :D

Reviewer 2: but that was just a random thought -- solving the original problem of payment subscriptions is useful on its own and generalising it may make it more complex than it needs to be

Author: Regarding the rate-limiting, I think we can consume some gas(https://docs.cosmos.network/master/basics/gas-fees.html) for CreatePlan message to cover the potential calculations later on.

Reviewer 2: the cost of the plan will depend on how many subscriptions there are -- so gas for creating subscription can take into account how many executions it'll lead to depending on the plan expiration and period?
given the expected initial gas price levels + exchange rate, not returning the "unused" gas from cancelled subscriptions shouldn't be a big issue for now -- similarly to what @christopher-crypto mentioned regarding the manual "retry" gas costs

Author: Added this:
```
period0 = (block_time + interval_offset) / interval
periodn = (expiration_time + interval_offset) / interval
ConsumeGas( (periodn - period0 + 1) * GasPerSubscription )
```

`GasPerSubscription` is a network parameter.
